Initial draft of blogpost on Confidential Computing in digital sovere… (#773)
SovereignCloudStack/website: _i18n/en/_posts/blog/2023-11-10-confidential-computing-in-digital-sovereign-environments.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Confidential Computing in digital sovereign environments"
category: tech
author:
  - "Markus Leberecht"
  - "Felix Kronlage-Dammers"
avatar:
  - "fkr.jpg"
  - "markusleberecht.png" 
about:
  - "fkr"
  - "mleberec"
---

# Confidential Computing in digital sovereign environments

## Why is confidential computing anticipated

> Protecting data is at the heart of any digital sovereignty discussion. Traditional controls to achieve this rely on encryption of data assets with keys managed such that sovereignty goals can be achieved. This bases the protection of data on proper management of keys based on a consistent role understanding and access management. So far, so common...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protecting data is at the heart of any digital sovereignty discussion. Traditional controls to achieve this rely on the encryption of data assets with keys managed such that sovereignty goals can be achieved. This bases data protection on proper key management based on a consistent role understanding and access management. So far, so common...
```
Grammarly suggestions

> Throughout a data asset's life cycle, there exist multiple and well-understood methods for protecting data at rest, i.e. when stored, such as drive, file, and object encryption, and for protecting data in transit on the wire via e.g. IPsec or TLS. Up to recently, however, when data is being processed it was required to be in cleartext, as was the code being executed to process it. Confidential Computing sets out to solve this: a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) in the CPU gets established that protects and isolates code and data at runtime. Implemented as part of a processor's memory map, encryption is again used to keep code and data within such as TEE confidential. Only after reading the encrypted memory lines into the processor package, such data gets decrypted so that it can be processed. Processor busines logic ensures that encryption keys are only managed by the tenant and cannot be utilized by other tenants nor by system software or platform administrators. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughout a data asset's life cycle, multiple and well-understood methods exist for protecting data at rest, i.e. when stored, such as drive, file, and object encryption, and for protecting data in transit on the wire via e.g. IPsec or TLS. Up to recently, however, when data is being processed, it was required to be in cleartext, as was the code being executed to process it. Confidential Computing sets out to solve this: a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) in the CPU gets established that protects and isolates code and data at runtime. Implemented as part of a processor's memory map, encryption is again used to keep code and data within such as TEE confidential. Only after reading the encrypted memory lines into the processor package does such data get decrypted so that it can be processed. Processor business logic ensures that encryption keys are only managed by the tenant and cannot be utilized by other tenants nor by system software or platform administrators. 
```

Grammrly suggestions.

This execution model helps to separate duties between a tenant and a platform owner that do not belong to the same organization - a model all too common in public cloud computing. Going one step further, typical Confidential Computing implementations also allow any external party to get a cryptographic proof of a TEE's content at runtime via a remote attestation mechanism. In such a case a challenged TEE's CPU would reply with a signed current measurement (hash) of the TEE's memory map as well as a patch level indicator for the underlying server platform's critical firmware, allowing the relying party to validate these values against expectations before sharing secrets with the TEE. 

> Overall, Confidential Computing when implemented well can be utilized to enforce compliance needs and as such helps to amplify the sovereignty posture of digital services based on it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, Confidential Computing, when implemented well, can be utilized to enforce compliance needs and, as such, helps to amplify the sovereignty posture of digital services based on it. 
```

Grammarly suggestions

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:100%">
    {% asset 'blog/cc/JM-ecdsa-attestation-sequence.gif' class="figure-img w-100" alt="Intel SGX ECDSA Attestation"%}
    <figcaption>Intel SGX ECDSA Attestation</figcaption>
</figure>

Since Linux kernel 5.13, a system with SGX enabled will be supported by the mainstream kernel without additional configuration in all Linux distributions. On bare metal and within KVM/Qemu-based VMs, SGX memory - the so-called Enclave Page Cache - will be accessible to code utilizing SGX instructions. Up to date versions of qemu (>=6.2) and libvirt (>=8.10) support using SGX within virtual machines.

b) VM-based TEEs: Intel TDX And AMD SEV

While application-based TEEs like SGX enclaves minimize the trust boundary around confidential data and thus help to keep attack surfaces small, it requires explicit effort to convert existing artifacts, whether through re-linking or through application refactoring. Technologies such as Intel Trust Domain Extensions (Intel TDX) and AMD Secure Encrypted Virtualization (AMD SEV) in their respective variants directly support virtual machines to be deployed as TEEs. 

> The simplicity of the deployment model comes at some costs, though: this model relies on hypervisor support and by definition cannot be implemented as a bare-metal deployment method. Also, attestation of such a VM-based TEE will only be able to reasonably measure the static portions of a deployed VM image as typical memory sizes might be a barrier for timely hashing, and because of a VM's operating system dynamicism will hardly find a single definable state to compare against a golden value. For these reasons, remote attestation of VM TEEs typically only focuses on the static boot stack and will rely on e.g. Linux' Integrity Measurement Architecture to protect an application-defined set of critical files against unwanted changes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplicity of the deployment model comes at some costs, though: this model relies on hypervisor support and, by definition, cannot be implemented as a bare-metal deployment method. Also, attestation of such a VM-based TEE will only be able to reasonably measure the static portions of a deployed VM image as typical memory sizes might be a barrier for timely hashing, and because of a VM's operating system dynamics will hardly find a single definable state to compare against a golden value. For these reasons, remote attestation of VM TEEs typically only focuses on the static boot stack and will rely on, e.g., Linux's Integrity Measurement Architecture to protect an application-defined set of critical files against unwanted changes. 
```

Grammarly suggestions

An easy way to compare the security posture of different Confidential Computing deployment variants is shown in the following diagram.

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:100%">
    {% asset 'blog/cc/trusted-boundary-elements.png' class="figure-img w-100" alt="Trusted Boundary Elements"%}
    <figcaption>Trusted Boundary Elements</figcaption>
</figure>

A limiting factor for Confidential Computing in both cases is the use of I/O-based accelerators as the combined execution environment of CPU TEE, I/O communication over PCIexpress, and the accelerator's own TEE cannot be secured at I/O line speed at the time of writing and as such will only form a rather slow combined TEE. 

## From theory to Trusted Execution Environments in SCS

For SCS to embark on the support for Confidential Computing, SGX presents itself as the most mature and deployment-proven due to its length of availability. In order for the SCS IaaS reference implementation to be able to support SGX Enclaves the support for SGX must therfore be present in OpenStack.

> With the [Secured Cloud Management Stack](https://github.com/intel/secured-cloud-management-stack/) (SCM) a lot of work has been done by Intel to bring Trusted Execution Environments to OpenStack. In order to make this accessable on top of SCS it must become part of upstream OpenStack. Through the various tenders run by the Sovereign Cloud Stack project bringing technoloy upstream is being funded and a while ago it has been concluded to tackle the upstreaming of the Intel patchset as part of our [tender package 01](https://scs.community/tenders/lot1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the [Secured Cloud Management Stack](https://github.com/intel/secured-cloud-management-stack/) (SCM) a lot of work has been done by Intel to bring Trusted Execution Environments to OpenStack. In order to make this accessable on top of SCS it must become part of upstream OpenStack. Through the various tenders run by the Sovereign Cloud Stack project, bringing technology upstream is being funded, and a while ago, it was concluded to tackle the upstreaming of the Intel patchset as part of our [tender package 01](https://scs.community/tenders/lot1).
```

Grammarly suggestions

It consists of several components (mainly microservices) enabling federations in data ecosystems and providing interoperability across federations.

These services empower federations to authenticate and authorize participants in a federation, for example via credential validation, and cover technology functionalities to ensure a consistent level of trust between all Participants of a federation.

* Authentication & Authorization Service (AAS)
* Personal Credential Manager (PCM)
* Organization Credential Manager (OCM)
* Trust Services (TRU)
* Notarization Service (NOT)

<figure class="figure mx-auto d-block" style="width:100%">
    {% asset 'blog/cc/xfsc-architecture.png' class="figure-img w-100" alt="XFSC Architecture Overview"%}
    <figcaption>XFSC Architecture Overview</figcaption>
</figure>

> The architectural overview shows the various microservices involved in the XFSC. Confidential Computing for the Organizational Credential Manager (OCM) allows to attest running code of OCM before sending secrets and enables to keep secrets confidential while processing further activities in XFSC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architectural overview shows the various microservices involved in the XFSC. Confidential Computing for the Organizational Credential Manager (OCM) allows one to attest to the running code of OCM before sending secrets. It enables one to keep secrets confidential while processing further activities in XFSC.
```

Grammarly suggestion.
